@document.meta
title: MCP Server
description: Model Context Protocol server for AI-assisted documentation browsing
authors: [
  NTBBloodbath
]
categories: [
  docs
]
created: 2026-07-12T00:00:00-04:00
updated: 2026-07-12T00:00:00-04:00
draft: false
layout: docs
version: 1.0.0
@end

Norgolith ships an {https://modelcontextprotocol.io}[MCP (Model Context Protocol)] server that lets AI
assistants browse, read, and search the documentation directly. This means you can ask your AI
editor about Norgolith features, plugin development, or templating without switching context.

The server exposes documentation pages as resources and provides tools for searching and reading
source code.

** Quick Start

Install and configure the MCP server, then connect from your AI editor.

*** Installation

**** From crates.io

@code bash
cargo install norgolith-mcp
@end

**** From source

@code bash
git clone https://github.com/norgolith/core
cd norgolith
cargo build --release --manifest-path norgolith-mcp/Cargo.toml
@end

**** With Nix

@code bash
nix build .#norgolith-mcp
@end

The binary is at `target/release/norgolith-mcp`.

*** Configuration

Add the server to your MCP client configuration.

**** opencode.json

@code json
{
  "$schema": "https://opencode.ai/config.json",
  "mcp": {
    "norgolith": {
      "type": "local",
      "command": "norgolith-mcp",
      "enabled": true
    }
  }
}
@end

**** Claude Desktop

@code json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "norgolith": {
      "command": ["norgolith-mcp"]
    }
  }
}
@end

**** Generic MCP client

@code json
{
  "mcp": {
    "norgolith": {
      "type": "local",
      "command": ["norgolith-mcp"],
      "enable": true
    }
  }
}
@end

**** Generic MCP client

Check the documentation for your LLM client.

+html.class note
> Make sure `norgolith-mcp` is in your `PATH`, or provide the full path to the binary.

** Resources

Each documentation page is available as a resource with URI `norgolith://{path}` and MIME type
`text/x-norg`.

@embed html
<table>
<thead><tr><th>URI</th><th>Description</th></tr></thead>
<tbody>
<tr><td>norgolith://docs/commands</td><td>CLI commands reference</td></tr>
<tr><td>norgolith://docs/configuration</td><td>Site configuration reference</td></tr>
<tr><td>norgolith://docs/content-schemas</td><td>Content schema validation</td></tr>
<tr><td>norgolith://docs/contributing</td><td>Contributing guide</td></tr>
<tr><td>norgolith://docs/getting-started</td><td>Quick start guide</td></tr>
<tr><td>norgolith://docs/index</td><td>Documentation index</td></tr>
<tr><td>norgolith://docs/installation</td><td>Installation guide</td></tr>
<tr><td>norgolith://docs/plugins</td><td>Plugin development guide</td></tr>
<tr><td>norgolith://docs/templating</td><td>Templating reference</td></tr>
<tr><td>norgolith://docs/templating-migration</td><td>Tera v2 migration guide</td></tr>
<tr><td>norgolith://docs/theming</td><td>Theming guide</td></tr>
<tr><td>norgolith://index</td><td>Site landing page</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>
@end

Source code resources (MIME type `text/x-rust`):

@embed html
<table>
<thead><tr><th>URI</th><th>Description</th></tr></thead>
<tbody>
<tr><td>norgolith://src/sdk/lib.rs</td><td>Plugin SDK API</td></tr>
<tr><td>norgolith://src/core/plugin/mod.rs</td><td>Plugin loader core</td></tr>
<tr><td>norgolith://src/core/plugin/ffi.rs</td><td>C ABI bridge</td></tr>
<tr><td>norgolith://src/core/plugin/manifest.rs</td><td>Plugin manifest parsing</td></tr>
<tr><td>norgolith://src/core/plugin/sandbox.rs</td><td>Landlock sandboxing</td></tr>
<tr><td>norgolith://src/core/shared/render.rs</td><td>Tera context variables</td></tr>
<tr><td>norgolith://src/core/shared/metadata.rs</td><td>Page metadata structure</td></tr>
<tr><td>norgolith://src/core/tera/mod.rs</td><td>Tera functions, filters, and tests</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>
@end

** Tools

@embed html
<table>
<thead><tr><th>Tool</th><th>Description</th></tr></thead>
<tbody>
<tr><td><code>search_docs(query)</code></td><td>Search all documentation for a query string</td></tr>
<tr><td><code>read_source(path)</code></td><td>Read a source file from the repo</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>
@end

*** search_docs

Perform a full-text search across all documentation pages. Returns matching entries with their
norgolith:// URIs and relevance snippets.

@code json
{
  "query": "plugin manifest",
  "results": [
    { "name": "docs-plugins", "uri": "norgolith://docs/plugins", "snippet": "..." }
  ]
}
@end

*** read_source

Read a source file from the repository. Accepts a file path relative to the repo root.

@code json
{
  "path": "sdk/src/lib.rs",
  "content": "use serde::{Serialize, Deserialize};..."
}
@end

** Usage Examples

*** Plugin development

Ask your AI editor questions like:

- "How do I write a Norgolith plugin?"
- "How does the plugin manifest work?"
- "What hooks are available and when do they run?"
- "Show me the plugin SDK source code"
- "How does the FFI bridge work?"

*** Theme development

- "How do I create a Norgolith theme?"
- "What Tera variables are available in templates?"
- "Show me all registered Tera filters and functions"
- "How does `generate_toc` work?"
- "What page metadata fields can I use in my theme?"

*** General

- "What commands does lith have?"
- "How do I configure content schemas?"
- "Search docs for draft handling"
- "How does the build pipeline work?"

** Development

The MCP server source lives at `norgolith-mcp/src/main.rs` in the repository. The build script
embeds documentation pages and source files at compile time using `include_str!`, so the server
runs without filesystem access to the docs directory - everything is baked into the binary.

To rebuild the embedded content after changing docs:

@code bash
cargo build --release --manifest-path norgolith-mcp/Cargo.toml
@end

{:/docs/contributing:}[Next: Contributing ->]
