@document.meta
title: Tera v2 Migration Guide
description: Breaking changes and migration steps for Tera v2
authors: [
  NTBBloodbath
]
categories: [
  docs
]
created: 2026-07-06T00:00:00-0400
updated: 2026-07-06T00:00:00-0400
draft: false
layout: docs
version: 1.1.1
@end

Norgolith has migrated from Tera v1 to Tera v2. This guide covers what changed
and how to update your templates.

** What changed

*** Optional chaining

Tera v2 replaces the is defined test with optional chaining via the ?.
operator. Undefined fields in root position cause errors. The ?.? operator
returns undefined (falsy) instead of erroring.

Before:
@code django
{% if config.highlighter is defined and config.highlighter.enable %}
@end

After:
@code django
{% if config.highlighter?.enable %}
@end

The ?.? operator works anywhere a field might be undefined for safe access.

*** now() function

Built-in now() was removed. Use tera-contrib date functions instead.

Before:
@code django
{{ now(format="%Y") }}
@end

After:
@code django
{{ now() | date(format="%Y") }}
@end

*** matching test

The matching test now requires a keyword argument named pat.

Before:
@code django
{% if value is matching("^nil$") %}
@end

After:
@code django
{% if value is matching(pat="^nil$") %}
@end

*** Removed filters

These filters were removed from Tera v2 core: concat, map, addslashes,
and get_env. Norgolith provides backward-compatible shims for two commonly
used filters: the attribute-based filter and the slice filter.

*** Renamed filters

- escape was renamed to escape_html
- as_str was renamed to str
- linebreaksbr was renamed to newlines_to_br
- divisibleby was renamed to divisible_by
- object was renamed to map

The following filters remain unchanged and built-in: default, safe,
join, sort, truncate, replace, title, upper, lower,
length, first, last, trim, int, float, abs, round,
split, reverse, indent, capitalize, wordcount, pluralize,
escape_xml, newlines_to_br.

*** Tera-contrib filters

date, striptags, matching, regex_replace, and spaceless are
provided by tera-contrib and registered automatically.

*** Template loading

The old parse method was replaced by glob-based loading. Theme templates
are loaded via a batch file method to preserve cross-directory inheritance.
The manual inheritance chain builder was removed (automatic in v2).

*** Error pages

Error templates (404.html, 500.html) are registered after all
user and theme templates load. The base template guards metadata access
with ?.? so error pages render without metadata context.

** What stays the same

- Template variable syntax and all standard Tera delimiters
- Conditional and loop constructs
- Template inheritance via extends and block
- The generate toc function
- All built-in filters listed above

** Quick migration checklist

1. Search for is defined and replace with ?.?
2. Search for now(format and replace with now() piped to date
3. Search for is matching with positional arg and add pat keyword
4. Search for the old escape filter and rename to escape html
5. Search for the old as str filter and rename to str
6. Search for the old linebreaksbr filter and rename to newlines to br
7. Search for the old divisibleby filter and rename to divisible by
