@document.meta
title: Norgolith 1.0: A New Chapter
description: After two years of development, Norgolith reaches 1.0 with Tera v2, shortcodes, plugins, and more.
authors: [
  NTBBloodbath
]
categories: [
  release
  announcement
]
created: 2026-07-07T00:00:00+00:00
updated: 2026-07-07T00:00:00+00:00
draft: false
layout: post
version: 1.0.0
@end

Today we are thrilled to announce the 1.0 release of Norgolith. This is not just a version bump. It
is the result of two years and three months of development, 11 releases from 0.1.0 to 1.0.0, and
countless hours of dogfooding (this very site runs on Norgolith too!). What started as a Zig experiment in
April 2024 grew into a Rust-powered static site generator built around the Norg markup document format.

Whether you are building a personal blog, technical documentation, or a full-featured content site,
Norgolith 1.0 gives you the tools to ship faster and with less friction. Here is what is new.

** What is New in 1.0

  *** Tera v2 and Shortcodes

      The template engine has been upgraded from Tera v1 to Tera v2. This brings shortcodes (reusable
      components you can embed in any template), a richer filter ecosystem via tera-contrib, and
      optional chaining for safer template rendering.

      @code tera
      {{ component(name="card", title="Hello", body="World") }}
      @end

      Shortcodes work just like functions: pass arguments, get rendered HTML. No more copy-pasting the
      same card or alert markup across templates.

      {:/docs/templating-migration:}[Tera v2 migration guide]

  *** Custom Error Pages

      Drop a 404.html and 500.html in your templates directory and they render automatically with the
      full theme and layout. No more bare white pages when someone hits a broken link.

  *** Plugin Sources

      Building on the plugin system introduced in 0.5, 1.0 lets you install plugins from crates.io or
      any Git repository:

      @code bash
      lith plugin install norgolith-tree-sitter-highlight
      lith plugin install --git https://github.com/norgolith/norgolith-tree-sitter.git
      @end

  *** Per-Plugin Configuration

      Plugins are configured directly in your norgolith.toml:

      @code toml
      [plugins.my-plugin]
      option = "value"
      @end

  *** SDK Logging Bridge

      Plugin developers can now log through Norgolith's tracing pipeline. Log messages from your plugin
      appear alongside core Norgolith output with proper level filtering and formatting.

  *** Theme Compatibility

      Themes can declare a min_version field. When you install or update, Norgolith checks
      compatibility and warns before applying. No more cryptic template errors from mismatched
      features.

  *** Rust 2024 Edition

      The entire codebase has been updated to the Rust 2024 edition, keeping the project on the latest
      language standards and ensuring long-term maintainability.

** What Came Before

  Norgolith did not appear overnight. Two earlier releases laid the groundwork that 1.0 builds on.

  *** 0.5 (July 2026)

      The biggest pre-1.0 release. It shipped the full plugin system (C ABI types, Landlock sandbox
      with filesystem confinement, configurable timeout, panic isolation, and build hooks at pre-build,
      post-convert, and post-render stages). It also added incremental builds via content-hash caching,
      parallel builds with Rayon, SEO (sitemap.xml, robots.txt with configurable presets, OpenGraph
      and Twitter Card meta tags), configurable content collections and categoriesDir, and a
      dramatically faster dev server that pre-renders everything into memory and hot-reloads config
      changes.

  *** 0.4 (May 2026)

      Introduced automatic XML feed discovery (RSS, Atom, or any XML template rendered as a feed),
      styled per-step build output, colored and compact dev server request logging, graceful dev server
      shutdown via Ctrl-D, and symlink resolution in watched directories.

** Design Philosophy

  Norgolith occupies a unique space in the static site generator landscape. Unlike tools built for
  Markdown workflows, Norgolith is designed from the ground up around Norg's structured markup document
  format.

  - *vs Hugo*: Hugo uses Go templates and supports a dozen content formats (Markdown, AsciiDoc, Org
    Mode, reStructuredText) but has no plugin system. Its asset pipeline includes bundling,
    fingerprinting, image processing, and Sass/PostCSS compilation, making it the most self-contained
    SSG on the market. Hugo is fast, but its Go template syntax is unique to Hugo and its
    file-watching pipeline is single-threaded for builds.

  - *vs Zola*: Zola uses Tera (v1) and is the closest kin to Norgolith in the Rust SSG space. It
    ships with Sass compilation, image processing, built-in search, and automatic link checking. But
    Zola is Markdown-only and has no plugin system. Its Tera is one major version behind
    Norgolith's, missing shortcodes and optional chaining.

  - *Norgolith*: Tera v2 templates (shared ecosystem with Zola), Norg-native content (not
    Markdown), a unique C ABI plugin system with Landlock sandbox that neither Hugo nor Zola can
    match, incremental and parallel builds, and a plugin-based path to features like search
    (even {https://github.com/norgolith/norgolith-tree-sitter}[tree-sitter higlighting] is supported
    through plugins!). Norgolith is the only SSG that lets you extend the build pipeline at runtime
    without forking the generator.

** Quick Start

  Getting started with Norgolith takes seconds:

  @code bash
  # Create a new site
  $ lith new my-site \
      && cd my-site
  # Create a hello world post
  $ lith new -k post hello-world
  # Start dev server and open it in your browser
  $ lith dev --open
  # Build for production
  $ lith build
  @end

  No configuration required for a basic site except for your metadata. Add a theme, define content schemas, install
  plugins, all from norgolith.toml as your site grows. The {:/docs:}[full documentation] covers every
  option.

** Showcase

  These sites are built with Norgolith:

  - {https://docs.norgolith.dev}[Norgolith Documentation] (this site)
  - {https://amartin.beer}[NTBBloodbath's Blog] (maintainer's blog)
  - {https://blog.ladas552.me}[Ladas552's Blog]
  - {https://darkkronicle.com}[DarkKronicle's Blog]
  - {https://boltless.me}[BoltlessEngineer's Blog] (runs on an older Norgolith fork)

  Building your own site with Norgolith? {https://github.com/norgolith/core/issues/new}[Let us know]
  and we will add you to the list.

** By the Numbers

  - 469 commits across 11 releases (0.1.0 through 1.0.0)
  - 2 years 3 months of active development (April 2024 to July 2026)
  - 5 contributors
  - 53 commits and 66 files changed in this release alone!

** Breaking Changes (Migration Guide)

  Upgrading from 0.x requires a few template changes given upstream Tera v2 changes:

  - Replace `\{% if var is defined %\}` with `\{% if var?. %\}`
  - Replace `\{\{ now(format="%Y") \}\}` with `\{\{ now() | date(format="%Y") \}\}`
  - Replace `is matching("pattern")` with `is matching(pat="pattern")`
  - Renamed filters: `escape` to `escape_html`, `as_str` to `str`,
    `linebreaksbr` to `newlines_to_br, `divisibleby to `divisible_by`

  These changes are mechanical and searchable. The {:/docs/templating-migration:}[full migration guide]
  covers every change with before/after examples.

** Community

  Norgolith would not be where it is today without its contributors. Thank you to:

  - BoltlessEngineer
  - Ben Lubas
  - Ladas552 (also the nixpkgs and AUR package maintainer)
  - Sascha Buehrle

  Want to help shape the future of Norgolith? Check out the
  {https://github.com/norgolith/core/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md}[contributing guide] or join us
  on {https://discord.gg/T6EgTAX7ht}[Discord] in `#norgolith` under the 3rd-party category!

** What is Next

  1.0 is a foundation, not a finish line. The focus now shifts to:

  - *Content quality*: richer content schemas, cross-file validation, link checking, and built-in image
    optimization
  - *DX tooling*: interactive lith init with project templates, better error suggestions, and
    smoother onboarding
  - *Asset bundling and cache fingerprinting*: combine JS and CSS files; add content hashes to
    filenames for aggressive cache busting (minification is already in place!)
  - *Built-in search via plugin*: full-text search backed by ripgrep in WASM or a similarly
    performant approach, distributed through the existing plugin system

  Have ideas? {https://github.com/norgolith/core/issues/new}[Open an issue] or
  {https://discord.gg/T6EgTAX7ht}[join us on Discord].

** Full Changelog

  The complete changelog is available on GitHub:
  {https://github.com/norgolith/core/releases/tag/norgolith-v1.0.0}[v1.0.0 Release]

  It includes 53 commits across 66 files, with 6650 lines added and 4533 removed.
